Translated techlab 3.5 to english (#31)
appuio/techlab: labs/08_database.md

# Lab 8: Deploy and Attach a Database

> Most Applications are in a way stateful and safe their Data persistent in a Database, as a file or in a objectstore. In this Lab we will add an MySQL Service to our Project and attach it, so that multiple application pods can access the same database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's mostly two different kinds of state when talking about stateful applications. The easier method is state that can be preserved in e.g. some kind of database, as a file or in an object store. In this lab we are going to add a MySQL service to our project and attach it so that multiple application pods can access the same database.
```

> As an Example we use our Springboot App from [LAB 4](04_deploy_dockerimage.md), `[USER]-dockerimage`. **Hint:** `oc project [USER]-dockerimage`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're going to use our Springboot app from [lab 4](04_deploy_dockerimage.md), `[USER]-dockerimage`. **Hint:** `oc project [USER]-dockerimage`
```

> ## Task: LAB8.1: Create a MySQL service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Task: LAB8.1: Create a MySQL Service
```

Author: service is a regular english word, why would you write it whith a capital S?

> For our Example in this Lab we use an OpenShift Template which will create a MySQL Database with an EmptyDir Data Storage. This Setup is only recommended for test environements since all the Data is lost if the MySQL Pod is restarted. In a later Lab we will show you how to create a persistent volume for the Databank, so that the data doesn't get lost if the pod restarts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this lab we're going to use an OpenShift template which will create a MySQL database with ephemeral storage, meaning the database's data will not (yet) be persistent. This setup is therefore only recommended for test environments since all the data is lost if the MySQL pod is restarted. We are going to attach persistent storage to our database in a later lab.
```

> The MySQL Service can be created in the Web Console as well as the CLI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MySQL service can be created in the Web Console as well as with the CLI.
```

> To get the same result one simply has to set the database name, username, password and DatabaseServiceName regardless of the method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get the same result one has to simply set the database name, username, password and database service name regardless of the method:
```

### CLI

> Using the cli the MySQL Service can be created as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the cli the MySQL service can be created as follows:
```

```

### Web Console
In the Web Console one can create the MySQL (Ephemeral) Service via "Add to Project" -> "Data Stores":
![MySQLService](../images/lab_8_addmysql_service.png)

## Task: LAB8.2: Applikation an die Datenbank anbinden

> By default, a H2 memory database is used for our example-spring-boot application. This can be changed to our new MySQL service by setting the following environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default a H2 memory database is used for our example-spring-boot application. This can be changed to our new MySQL service by setting the following environment variables:
```

- SPRING_DATASOURCE_USERNAME appuio
- SPRING_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD appuio
- SPRING_DATASOURCE_DRIVER_CLASS_NAME com.mysql.jdbc.Driver

> - SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL jdbc:mysql://[Adress of the MySQL Service]/appuio?autoReconnect=true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL jdbc:mysql://[MySQL service's address]/appuio?autoReconnect=true
```

> For the address of the MySQL service, we can use either its cluster IP  (`oc get service`) or its DNS name (`<service>`). All services and pods within a project can be resolved via DNS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the MySQL service's address we can either use its cluster IP (`oc get service`) or its DNS name (`<service>`). All services and pods within a project can be resolved via DNS.
```

> For example, the value for the variable SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E.g. the value for the variable SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL is:
```

```

> Name of the Services: mysql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Name of the services: mysql
```

jdbc:mysql://mysql/appuio?autoReconnect=true
```

We can now set these environment variables in the DeploymentConfig example-spring-boot. After the **ConfigChange** (ConfigChange is registered as a trigger in the DeploymentConfig), the application is automatically deployed again. Because of the new environment variables the application connects to the MySQL DB and [Liquibase](http://www.liquibase.org/) creates the schema and imports the test data.

> **Note:** Liquibase is open source. It is a database independent library to manage database changes and to apply them to the database. Liquibase recognizes when starting the application, whether DB changes have to be applied to the database or not. See Logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Liquibase is open source. It is a database-independent library to manage and apply database changes. Liquibase recognizes when starting the application, whether database changes have to be applied to the database or not. See Logs.
```

```
SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL=jdbc:mysql://mysql/appuio?autoReconnect=true
```

> **Note:** `mysql` solves the cluster IP of the MySQL service within its project via DNS query. The MySQL database is only available within the project. The service is also available by the following name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** `mysql` resolves the cluster IP of the MySQL service within its project via DNS query. The MySQL database is only available within the project. The service is also available by the following name:
```

```

> Projectname = techlab-dockerimage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Project name = techlab-dockerimage
```

mysql.techlab-dockerimage.svc.cluster.local
```

Command for setting the environment variables:
```
 $ oc env dc example-spring-boot \
      -e SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL="jdbc:mysql://mysql/appuio?autoReconnect=true" \
      -e SPRING_DATASOURCE_USERNAME=appuio -e SPRING_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=appuio \
      -e SPRING_DATASOURCE_DRIVER_CLASS_NAME=com.mysql.jdbc.Driver
```

> You can use the following command to view DeploymentConfig as JSON. New, the Config also contains the set environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the following command to view the DeploymentConfig as JSON. Now the config also contains the freshly set environment variables:
```

...
```

The configuration can also be viewed and changed in the web console:

(Applications → Deployments → example-spring-boot, Actions, Edit YAML)

> ## Task: LAB8.3: Log into MySQL Service Pod and connect to DB manually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Task: LAB8.3: Manually Connect to Database
```

> As described in the Lab [07](07_troubleshooting_ops.md) you can log into a pod using  `oc rsh [POD]`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in [lab 07](07_troubleshooting_ops.md) you can log into a pod using `oc rsh [pod name]`:
```

```bash
$ oc get pods
NAME                           READY     STATUS             RESTARTS   AGE
example-spring-boot-8-wkros    1/1       Running            0          10m
mysql-1-diccy                  1/1       Running            0          50m

```

> Then log into the MySQL Pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then log into the MySQL pod:
```

```bash
oc rsh mysql-1-diccy
```

> Now you can connect to the database using mysql tool and display the tables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can connect to the database using the mysql client and display the tables:
```

mysql>
```

> Then you can use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you can use the following command to display all tables:
```

```mysql
show tables;
```

> Display all tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Task: LAB8.4: Import dump to MySQL DB

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Task: LAB8.4: Importing a Dump Into Our Database
```

> The task is to put the [dump](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/appuio/techlab/lab-3.3/labs/data/08_dump/dump.sql) into the MySQL database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The task is to import the [provided dump](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/appuio/techlab/lab-3.3/labs/data/08_dump/dump.sql) into the MySQL database.
```

> **Hint:** Use `oc rsync` to copy local files to a pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hint:** Use `oc rsync` to copy local files into a pod.
```

> **Attention:** Note that the rsync command of the operating system is used. On UNIX systems, rsync can be installed with the package manager, on Windows, for example, [cwRsync](https://www.itefix.net/cwrsync). If an installation of rsync is not possible, you can, for example, log into the pod and download the dump via `curl -O <URL>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Attention:** Note that the rsync command of the operating system is used. On most UNIX systems rsync can be installed via package manager, on Windows use e.g. [cwRsync](https://www.itefix.net/cwrsync). If an installation of rsync is not possible, you can still log into the pod and download the dump via `curl -O <URL>`.
```

> **Hint:** Use the mysql tool to load the dump.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Hint:** Use the mysql tool to import the dump.
```

**Hint:** The existing database must be empty beforehand. It can also be deleted and re-created.

---

## Solution: LAB8.4

Sync an entire directory (dump). This includes the file `dump.sql`. Note for the rsync-command the hint above aswell the missing trailing slash.

```bash
oc rsync ./labs/data/08_dump mysql-1-diccy:/tmp/
```

> Log in to the MySQL Pod:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to the MySQL pod:
```

```bash
oc rsh mysql-1-diccy
```

> Delete the existing Database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delete the existing database:
```

```bash
$ mysql -u$MYSQL_USER -p$MYSQL_PASSWORD -h$MYSQL_SERVICE_HOST appuio
...
mysql> drop database appuio;
mysql> create database appuio;
mysql> exit
```

Insert dump:

```bash
mysql -u$MYSQL_USER -p$MYSQL_PASSWORD -h$MYSQL_SERVICE_HOST appuio < /tmp/08_dump/dump.sql
```

> **Note:** he dump can be created as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The dump can be created as follows:
```
